Scripting for admins.
Thanks for coming.
We got a lot of good stuff,
a lot of good people,
a lot of good projects to hopefully
get you excited about doing some
scripting things and going out there.
So I'm Joel Rennich.
I'm a dude from middle of nowhere,
Illinois.
I've done some, woo, Illinois!
Savoy!
Woo!
I've done some scripting in my time,
but we got some other great people
that we're bringing up today to
talk about some very cool projects.
Cool projects to get you motivated,
cool projects that will show
you a little bit how a little
bit of work can go a long way.
This is the third year
we've done this session,
and that's what we like to show,
that scripting is very easy to get into,
and hopefully we show you a bit
of some sexy stuff that you can
get excited about and hopefully
bring back to where you were.
What you won't learn, though,
is how to script.
So if you came here to
learn how to script,
just leave.
It might be easier at that point.
We thought about how we could
do it in 45 minutes to an hour,
and we just couldn't
come up with anything.
So they wouldn't give us any more space.
Anyway, so a little bit of recap.
In 2004, we talked about AppleScript,
shell, and Perl there, the camel.
Then in 2005,
we came back to this session,
we talked about AppleScript,
we talked about Shell,
and we also had this thing,
which I didn't realize
was the Python logo.
It looks kind of snaky,
I guess is what they're going for.
And Python,
so a couple things added Python in
the new hotness at the time,
and good stuff.
Well, this year, AppleScript, Shell,
Perl, Java, PHP, Python,
expect didn't have a logo.
It hasn't changed in a little while,
and so we tried to do as best we could.
But so a lot more things
coming together here.
We're talking a lot today about
how we get multiple scripting
languages to work together.
Dogs and cats living in harmony.
Python and Perl and camels and
coffee cups all working together.
So hopefully some good stuff.
Sometimes we pick on Perl,
but there's a lot of
Perl coders out there,
and they're usually bigger than I am.
So today we'll pick on assembly coders,
all right, because I don't think too many
people code in assembly anymore.
They're usually older and
can't run as fast as I can.
So hopefully this session,
we'll get to that.
So this session is more fun
than coding in assembly,
all right, so that you get an idea of
how to do some scripting,
some cool stuff, using technologies that
we already have in place.
So we got three different kind of
projects that we're talking about.
The first one is going to be an
automated self-service method for
imaging a large group of machines,
all right.
This leverages Netboot, ASR,
and some other stuff with a very,
very cool web front end.
All right, and this is Brian James that's
going to be doing this.
It's something that we
use internally at Apple.
It's not really a product.
It's not something we can give you.
But certainly we can give you an idea
of what you could do by gluing all
these things together because none of
the individual pieces are proprietary
or secret or anything else like that.
Then we've got Nigel Kirsten coming up.
He's going to talk
about log-in hook magic,
all right.
A lot of times when we talk about
different administration topics,
we talk about fixing things that
are in there or customizing your
environment or doing some stuff that's
a little bit beyond what anybody
ever thought you should be doing.
Sometimes good, sometimes bad.
Those are typically
done with login hooks.
Nigel's going to talk about that.
And then finally,
Tim Perfit's going to come up and
talk about manipulating boot camp.
So you can actually go ahead
and clone your images and
do some fun stuff with that.
So with that aside,
let me introduce Brian James,
a dude from Cupertino,
who's going to come up here and
talk to you about some projects.
Hi, everybody.
My name is Brian James,
and I'm going to be talking to
you about autorestore.apple.com.
It's a web application that I wrote
to simplify OS installation.
So everyone out here has probably
installed Mac OS X more times
than they care to remember.
You know doing so
involves making choices,
making a couple selections,
you then wait, wait, wait, wait, wait.
You hear our little jingle and then
you have to answer more questions.
It's a pretty manual process,
but if you're only doing one machine,
it's not a big deal.
If you're doing a couple
machines every once in a while,
it's not a big deal.
But if you're like me and you're
stuck doing it to hundreds of
machines almost every other day,
sticking CDs in drives
gets a little bit old.
So after doing that a couple times,
I couldn't help but feel that
There had to be an easier way to install
an OS on a whole bunch of machines.
The very first optimization,
the obvious one,
is to use this tool called
Apple Software Restore,
or ASR.
It's a command line tool that
efficiently lets you clone two volumes.
I'm sure everybody's probably
heard of it and used it.
So the very first optimization I did
was to install and configure once,
set up one machine just how I wanted it,
and create disk images.
You can do that using Disk Utility,
and you can basically preserve one user.
So I stuck all those disk
images on a FireWire hard drive,
and I would walk from machine
to machine doing the restore.
So it was a good optimization,
but I still had to pick
a new startup disk.
I still had to come back
and reboot the machine.
So it was still a manual process that
involved me walking up to each machine.
So I figured there had
to be an even easier way.
So enter scripting.
Scripting is a great way to
perform repetitive operations.
I'm sure everybody knows that.
So I made my situation
a little bit better.
I took all my ASR images,
and I put them up on a server.
And I wrote a simple script
which mounted that server,
performed the restore, blessed,
and rebooted.
A script might look like this to do that.
Basically,
it would take the volume in the image,
and it would mount an AFP volume,
do the restore, bless the volume,
and reboot.
Pretty basic.
So, it saved me lots of time.
I could walk up to each machine,
run a single script,
and the whole process would be done.
When I came back, the machine would be
rebooted from the new image.
So, better but still annoying,
because I really prefer sitting
in my office and the lab.
So, SSH.
Why not sit in my office and SSH to the
machine and run the exact same script?
So, I took the script,
and I put it up on the server,
and I stuck it in the document root,
the web document root,
and I turned on the web server.
I would then SSH in to
the remote machines,
and I would download the
script and run it that way,
just like I was sitting at it.
So, I could now sit at my office.
An example SSH session might
look something like this.
SSH in is a local user.
I would go to my server,
at the remote host,
curl down the script from my server,
save it in /temp, make it executable,
run it just like I did before,
passing volume and image arguments.
That made things better.
One shot per machine, one,
and they were done.
I could do it remotely.
But what about passwords?
It was kind of annoying that I had
to enter a password each time.
It kind of prevented me
getting any more efficient.
Well, lucky for me, I'm not the first one
that's had this problem.
So all of your Macs out there come with
this really cool tool called Expect.
Expect is a program that
talks to other interactive
programs according to a script.
So when SSH expects you to be
sitting there entering passwords,
Expect can be there in your place.
Expect has a man page.
You can read it right now.
O'Reilly even wrote a book on the topic.
Good news for everybody here
is that the Expect script to
talk to SSH is really simple.
This is actually the only
working piece of code,
and it's the actual
Expect script I use for my tool.
You pass it the host, user password,
and the command you want to
run on the remote machine.
It does the SSH, and it even checks for
potential error cases,
like wrong username and password.
So don't try to write it down.
A quick Google search of Expect and
SSH will yield a result very similar.
So given this Expect script,
I can make my life even easier.
I write another shell script,
takes the same volume
and image arguments,
and a host, user, and password.
I wrap the three commands I would
do interactively-- the curl,
make it executable, reboot,
and I pass those to the Expect script.
With that script, I can now just write a
simple Perl looping script.
Assume that you're past
arrays of machines and all
the associated information.
You can now run a single command,
which can loop and fork off one
of those processes each time.
So, I'm now able to SSH into my
server and run one command,
and I can restore a whole bunch
of machines simultaneously.
So, I was really proud of myself,
and I walked into my
boss's office and I said,
hey, I've totally solved the problem.
I can now restore one machine, five, ten,
a hundred in the time it
basically takes to do one.
And he said, oh, great, you know,
let me see how it works,
because if it's good enough,
I'm going to fire all of
you and just do it myself.
So,
I opened up Terminal and I SSH'd
into my server and I said,
"Oh, you run this command,
you pass it these 5, these 10, these 15,
these 25 arguments," you know,
and his eyes just kind of
rolled back in his head.
And he said, "That works for you,
but don't expect I can't use this.
I feel much better with text fields,
buttons, pull-down menus." And really,
this did.
This worked for me,
but it would have been too
complicated for anyone else to use it.
It took way too many arguments
in a required terminal.
Well, wouldn't it be great if
it had a nice interface?
So I sort of stood back and
looked at what I'd done so far.
So I'd written all these great scripts.
I had totally solved the problem
from the server standpoint,
but I just had a tool that
was really too hard to use.
So embracing scripting,
I decided to keep what I had,
keep this core part the same,
and just figure out a nice way to
put a clever interface on top of it.
And what I really wanted was something
easy enough for anyone to use so that
you didn't have to read a manual.
You could just go to this website,
and it would be intuitive.
I wanted it to work from anywhere,
and I wanted it to scale just as
well as the server version did.
And in addition,
I needed a management interface because
we were making tons of these ASR images,
and I wanted other teams to be able
to -- I didn't want to have to get
involved if anyone else wanted to use it.
So I built a little interface
so that people could,
could keep track of their ASR images.
So the complete solution
that I ended up with does an
interface in HTML and JavaScript.
The server runs PHP,
which kind of acts as the glue between
the web and the shell commands.
MySQL is used to store
data about the images.
And the SSH expect and shell script
pieces pretty much remain the same.
So this is sort of what I ended up with,
or this is the current working version.
And I'm going to take you through a
basic usage scenario of how someone
would use it to put an OS on a machine.
So first thing you do
is type a host name.
In this case, I'm going to do bjames8,
which is a machine in my office.
And press the Add Target button.
It's going to send that
stuff to the server.
And the server's going to
send me back a little piece
of UI with an image selection,
a volume, username, and password.
The same fields,
or the same arguments that
the shell script took.
You'll notice the red dot.
And if you can read that text,
the red dot says that
that machine is sleeping.
So you might ask, well,
how does this website know
that machine's sleeping?
There's the red dot, sorry.
So how do I know that?
Pretty easy.
PHP can easily execute shell scripts.
So web browser submits
the data to the server.
PHP gets it,
executes a simple ping command.
Back and forth,
we have the state of the machine.
In PHP, this code is really simple.
You've got your host,
you've got your command.
You just executed three lines of code.
You know the state.
Well, in addition to ping,
we also need to know
whether SSH is turned on,
because that's a
requirement for this tool.
So also, there's this tool called NC.
It's just like ping, but instead,
you can just ask for a specific port.
So SSH runs on port 22.
So I'm going to run NC, ping 22,
and if I get a response, SSH is enabled.
That kind of sucks that
the machine's asleep,
because the whole point of
this tool is I don't want to
walk up to those machines.
Well, using the existing
infrastructure that I have,
why not try to wake the machine?
Waking an Ethernet-connected
machine over on connected to a,
you know, Ethernet port is pretty easy.
If you do a Google search
for wake on LAN,
you'll get 50 Perl scripts that all send
the magic packet to wake the machine.
So why not offer the user a wake service?
Easy enough?
So, same process.
Send the data back to the server,
this time execute the wake on LAN script.
So, what do you know?
It responded, B.
James 8 is now awake and
ready to be restored.
Next, image selection.
So my database on my server keeps
track of the URL to the image.
It's completely distributed.
The images can live on an NFS server,
AFP server, wherever you want them.
And my database just
keeps track of that URL,
along with a nice user-readable string,
so you can decide which image you'd like.
So you pick your image,
gonna pick a volume.
Well,
how do you know valid volumes if you're
physically nowhere near the machine?
So again, using the same infrastructure,
let's give the user some
UI to make volume selection.
So I've got a
Collect Volume Information button.
To do this,
we're actually gonna have to SSH to
the machine using our expect script.
So you need a user and a password.
So fill in those fields,
press the button.
I'm gonna show the user a
nice little Aqua progress bar,
compliments of the Apple online store.
And--
And so that process is
running and browser's waiting.
Exact same procedure.
Submit the values,
execute the shell script.
The shell script SSHs to the machine.
And a script is run locally on the
target machine to collect volumes.
Volume information is easy to get.
The mount command, HDI util command,
system profiler,
there's any number of commands.
That data's collected,
back to the server, stuck in my database,
and a response is sent.
Again, PHP, executing shell scripts.
This is an example of how you would
run that command on the remote machine.
You have your host user password.
The command curls the script down,
makes it executable, runs it.
We do a shell exec,
passing those four variables
to our expect script.
And that's really all it takes.
So we return with a
nice list of pull-down,
a pull-down menu with
a nice list of volumes.
User can select their volume.
Basically, the sky's the limit.
On that target machine,
I can run whatever commands I want.
So as another convenience,
why not collect hardware information?
So a dump assistant profiler
lets me know that BJames8
happens to be an iMac core duo.
So you can do all sorts of fun stuff.
[Transcript missing]
And when it's done,
the machine tells the server, I'm done.
The next time the browser
updates the status for BJames8,
you know it's done.
So a word about Ajax.
I'm sure Ajax is asynchronous
JavaScript and XML.
I'm sure everybody's heard it,
heard the hype, heard the buzz.
I didn't pick it for that reason.
Like way back when,
it was a standard submit-based page.
Ajax actually made my life a lot easier.
And if you have web-based tools that
you'd like to put nice interfaces on,
Ajax is a great way to do that.
It's really easy to learn.
There's great, powerful frameworks,
Prototype Dojo.
They wrap some of the basic functionality
and make it even more powerful.
Most importantly for me was the
fact that it was asynchronous,
which means I could submit a
request independently of any other.
And all these machines,
I might have a G3 900
megahertz iMac or a quad G5.
They're going to respond
at different times.
So Ajax allowed me to basically thread
everything starting at the browser.
And everything can respond independently.
So my server code is really simple.
It only needs to know how to perform
those actions on one machine.
And when all these web requests,
web submits hit the server,
these are all executed
basically simultaneously.
So JavaScript sort of made my,
or Ajax made my life really easy.
That's auto restore,
and that's basically what it
looks like to restore one.
And because of Ajax,
The work it takes to restore one
is the same amount of work it
takes to restore as many as I want.
Code on the server doesn't need
to know anything about many.
It knows just about one.
You may look at this and say, whoa,
but I still have to fill
in all these text fields,
pull down menus.
Well, because it's HTML, JavaScript,
I can do all this cool UI stuff.
Like, for instance,
if you have host names
that have numeric ranges,
which is typical if you have a
large group of test machines,
you can enter a prefix
followed by a numeric range,
and it'll add all the
numeric values in between.
That's one example.
Another example is what
I call a default row,
and that basically means
you can give an image value,
a volume value, user password,
and any targets that are added will
automatically assume those values.
So you can do all these tricky things
to reduce the amount of typing.
So that's my tool,
and that's a basic recap.
It does lots of other stuff
because the basic infrastructure of
submitting things from a browser,
executing shell scripts,
you can do all kinds
of really cool stuff.
Sorry.
So in closing,
it was really important for me to
pick the right language for the job.
So I let shells do what shells do best,
and I let JavaScript do
what JavaScript does best.
And I was guaranteed that, like,
you know,
shell scripts can execute scripts
in other languages and vice versa.
So do the pieces in the
languages that make sense,
and you're guaranteed they're going
to integrate well down the road.
And just in closing, for me,
this project started three and a
half years ago and really isn't
something I've done full time.
It's just something that
evolved over time based on need.
So if I tried to think of the problem,
like, all at once,
I probably would have never,
it would have just overwhelmed me.
But I started small,
and I optimized the pieces that I could,
and it just,
my solution just progressed over time.
And that's kind of, you know,
people call it the Unix philosophy.
Small pieces solve one
small problem at a time,
and you chain those pieces together
to solve more complex problems.
So it's not, I didn't read.
I didn't read this before I started.
It just ended up that way.
So, and now to talk about login
hooks is Nigel Kirsten.
Okay, so I'm a sysadmin at a
university in Australia,
as you might be able to tell.
And I'm going to be
talking about login hooks.
Login hooks are really,
really useful to kind of fill in
the gaps that we might have from
MCX management or whatever we want
to put in our directory service.
They're really useful for
managing parts of our SOE,
and I kind of feel that they don't get
the publicity that they really deserve.
So what I'm going to cover
is what login hooks are,
how they work, how we implement them,
and then I'm going to go through some of
the login hooks that I use day to day.
I was sort of thinking
about doing a demo,
but a login hook being an invisible
script that runs when someone logs in at
the login window isn't really compelling.
They're pretty simple.
They're a script that runs whenever
a user logs in at the login window.
So remember, it doesn't happen over SSH.
It doesn't happen over AFP, SMB,
any other method.
Whenever any user logs
in at the login window,
if a login hook has been
defined for that computer,
it'll run.
They get executed after
authentication is successful,
but before the finder
appears to the user.
So they're pretty much transparent
as far as the user's concerned.
And they run as the local root user.
So this allows you to do
local privileged operations.
And you can also use sudo
to run commands as the user.
You can write them in
any scripting language.
I don't really care what you use.
I'm pretty language agnostic.
But whatever you're happiest with,
write your login hooks in that.
Technical details are pretty minimal.
The first argument passed to
the script is the short name
of the user who's logging in.
If you're using bash, it's $1.
If you're using Perl, PHP,
it's the first item of the argv arrays.
One thing a few people used to do
was use return codes to deny login,
but that kind of stopped working,
I think, around 10.2 or something.
So you can't actually do that.
As we'll see, though,
there's a few ways you can be a
little bit more brutal and just
kill the whole login window session.
I should mention that logout hooks exist.
They work pretty much
exactly the same way.
The only difference is
when a user logs out,
the script runs, and when it finishes,
then the login window
appears for the next user.
They're simple.
If you can enter the terminal,
type a couple of commands,
you can write a login hook.
What are they good for?
Well, a word that seems to have come
into pretty much semi-official
terminology is crappy apps.
I think that's the Mac Enterprise crowd
laughing in the crowd there.
I don't know about you guys,
but I have a lot of applications
that are per seat licensed,
per seat licensed.
But they put all this crap in
application support in the users folder,
preferences.
And if that stuff's not there,
the app doesn't run.
So log-in hooks are pretty good
for copying all that stuff in.
They're good for enforcing
templates or preferences that
might not fit into the MCX model.
Maybe you don't have a directory service.
You can work that way.
They're good for
enforcing stuff at log-in.
And I find they're really useful
for modifying the SOE for a
certain conjunction of this kind
of user on this kind of machine.
Stuff that the MCX user group
model doesn't always fit in nicely,
too.
And finally,
what I use them for quite a lot is
redirecting parts of a network home
directory to the local machine.
I know there's a bunch of people out
there who do the other way as well.
They run as a local user,
they mount a network drive drive on
login and they might redirect parts of
the network drive to the local account.
So, setting them up.
You've got three main
methods we can set them up.
Two modern and one kind of legacy.
So we can set them up locally
using the defaults domain,
we can put them in the
directory using MCX,
or we can go and edit the etc.tty.s file.
Setting them up locally is pretty simple.
We just use the defaults command
to write to the login window
domain for the root user.
And we just specify a login
hook and the path to the script.
So long as it's executable
and it's a valid script,
that'll run whenever a user logs in.
Those of you doing image maintenance,
it modifies login window plist
in the root user's home folder
and just puts that stuff in.
So if you just need to edit it by hand,
you can define them that way as well.
You can also put them in MCX,
which is something I've only just
sort of started doing recently.
You can only define them
for your computer lists,
so not for your user groups.
But one thing I was kind of thinking
was that in the last couple of days,
we found out about how we can now
have nested groups for computer lists.
And there's sort of no reason
why we shouldn't be able to,
not that I've tried this,
but have multiple nested
groups of computer lists
defining different login hooks.
So you might have a
generic lab login hook.
You might have a specific one
for these kinds of lab machines.
You might have a specific one for
the teacher's machine in the lab.
So we should be able to get a
hierarchy of login hooks going.
And if we can't,
and it's not working in 10.5,
we should probably test
that and file some bugs.
We define them in Workgroup Manager,
in the Scripts tab, in Login Preferences.
And as you see,
we just fill in where the script is.
It's actually pretty good.
It'll warn you.
It'll go, hey, this isn't executable.
And we can also choose to execute
the computer's login hook script.
So that was the first method.
So really, the first two methods that I'm
showing aren't a case of either/or.
You can define a local login hook.
You can define a network login hook.
And they will both run quite happily.
You probably can't read that from here,
huh, maybe?
There's a couple of caveats.
If we're defining the MCX,
we need to tell the client machine how
you're allowed to run MCX login scripts,
which is pretty simple.
We just write to the login
window domain again and just say,
yes, we want to enable login scripts.
Then we need to do one
of two other things.
We can either bind the client to
the directory using trusted binding,
so not just setting it
up in directory access,
but actually binding with
a username and password.
Or alternatively,
we can modify the client so
that it doesn't actually require
that sort of level of trust.
So what we're doing here is we're
changing the MCX script trust
level so that it'll trust anything.
Obviously, this isn't quite as secure.
You might have clients
connect to other directories.
You might not want other stuff to run.
So binding's probably the way to go,
but depending on your environment,
that might not be the case.
Finally, we've got the old-school method.
The first two methods,
using defaults and using MCX,
they only work in 10.3 and 10.4 and 10.5,
I assume.
This method, however, works in 10.2,
but it didn't work in 10.4.0 or 10.4.1,
but Apple fixed it again for 10.4.2.
So I can actually think of many good
reasons you'd want to do it this way.
Maybe if you're supporting 10.2,
you poor, poor, poor people,
you might still want to have to do this.
Edit, et cetera, TTYs,
change the console line,
and just add the login hook.
Again,
we're just adding the path to the hook.
If you need more info about
doing things in this way,
have a look at this
Apple Tech Info article.
So what kind of stuff
do I do in Login Hooks?
Well, this is what we're going
to run through today.
We want to work out a way to tell
whether a user who's logging in is local,
whether they're mobile,
whether they're a network user.
We want to set up an alert
for local non-mobile users,
because in my environment,
we try to avoid them completely.
And if someone's logging in that way,
we want to try and work it out and go and
migrate them to something more modern.
For the mobile users,
we set up our SOE so that
all user home directories are
sitting on a secondary partition,
because we like to be able to just
blow away the whole system drive and
not worry about backing up user data.
The trouble with new mobile accounts
is they get created in users.
So I'm going to go through how we
have a Login Hook that on first login
for a mobile account moves the home
directory to the second partition.
And I'm going to go through modifying
Kerberos environment for specific users.
That'll make a bit more
sense when we get to it.
For network users,
the only thing I'm going to
cover is redirecting library
caches to the local hard drive,
because we found that makes a really,
really big difference for performance
on network home directories.
And we're going to set up some
preferences for all of the user accounts.
So, you know,
I wrote this in the last week or two,
and it's already legacy code.
This is how we tell whether
someone's a local user or not.
And if you guys were at
Dave O'Rourke's talk yesterday,
not that I'm unhappy about NetInfo going,
you know,
I wouldn't want to give that impression.
So we're going to have
to rewrite this script.
This will have to use DSCL.
The syntax is the same.
Open up both main pages, look at them.
It'll be simple.
So we just have a look.
Does the user exist in the local domain?
What now gets called DSLocal.
If they do, we're setting the variable
to say they're a local user.
If they're a local user,
we go and see if they're a mobile user.
Remember that mobile users are
just a specific type of local user.
So again, we're using NRUtil, legacy.
We're reading their
authentication authority.
If you've ever looked
at a mobile user record,
they have the local cached user in
their authentication authority so that
the OS can treat them differently.
So we're just looking for that string.
If they're a mobile user,
the grep c command's going to return 1.
If they're not, it'll return 0.
And so now we've worked out
whether someone's local or mobile.
If they're not local, they network.
So, setting up an alert
for non-mobile logins,
local non-mobile.
It's pretty simple.
We're just setting up an email script so
that we can alert the IT support staff.
This is the user, this is the machine,
this was the date,
and we can go and fix it.
You'll see that I've
commented out of line there,
kill all login window.
That's kind of the brutal approach
I was talking about earlier.
So as soon as you hit
that in your script,
the login hook stops, everything stops,
you get a blue screen for five,
ten seconds, and login window appears.
You might want to actually let
the user know something's going
on if you're going to go killing
their login window sessions.
And I'll mention at the end,
but have a look at Growl,
have a look at iHook,
both of them are really
excellent products.
pop up some kind of dialogue and just go,
no.
So this is really dense looking,
but so you can stop
copying it down about now.
But it's pretty simple.
If you go through it line by line,
it either consists of logger statements.
Logger's a really useful
tool for scripting.
If you guys aren't using it,
just by default, pass it a string and
logs it to system log.
You can set your different log
levels you want to log it for,
so you can redirect things
to different log files.
Incredibly useful.
Again, we're using an IUTIL,
and we'll have to change that.
So what we're doing is we're
going through mobile account.
User logs in,
prompts them if you've set it that way.
Do you want to create a mobile account?
It logs in.
The login hook goes and looks and says,
okay, so what's their home directory?
It's set to users, whatever.
We don't actually want it to be there.
So we set up the system log to say
we're moving their home directory,
make the new home directory,
set the permissions.
All the magic kind of happens here.
And apparently this might be going too.
But at least we'll have
it for all of 10.4.
And somehow, we're going to have to be
able to do this somehow.
This is kind of an
undocumented tool by Apple.
If you Google around for it,
you'll come across a couple of
posts by people explaining what
all the different commands do.
What we're using it here for is it'll
go create a mobile user with $1,
which remember is the username
of the user logging in,
with this home directory.
With the mobile home's location,
again $1.
You might wonder why I didn't just use an
IUTIL to just modify the home directory.
I'm not.
I'm using a new home directory.
I kind of found I had
really mixed results.
Some applications would pick
up the new home directory.
Some applications would
pick up the old one.
It seemed a bit flaky.
And this seemed to work a lot better.
Just overwrite the whole record
with a new home directory.
And then flush the lookup dcache,
which is now another dead technology.
But we're going to have
to flush caches somehow.
Bye.
So that's kind of pretty simple.
We're just checking for the disk,
checking whether the
directory is already there.
In my environment where I run this,
I kind of have a few more dialogues.
I use iHook.
I sort of pop up a few things saying,
hey, I'm moving the home directory here.
I might have a staff member
with 8 gig on the server.
And they might be going, hey,
so this login's taking a while
because it'll sync it all down,
copy it all to another partition.
And we might want to get alerted.
So say we do wipe the system drive,
the local mobile user account disappears.
We want to make sure we don't create
a blank user folder and then overwrite
all 8 gig of their data with it.
We run Pro Tools in a lab.
There must be some of you who do this.
Apparently DigiDesign have now fixed it.
The 7.0 R C 6 1 bug report
patch has been fixed.
It wouldn't launch if your library
preferences was on a network volume.
So we kind of had this big problem
deploying Pro Tools 7 in our labs,
and we decided that we were just going
to create a dedicated mobile account
and forget about the whole thing.
Then we realized, you know,
we're in this really nice,
Kerberized OS X server environment.
My users log in and they
never put a password in again
as far as file servers go.
But they'd log in as Pro Tools and the
students would go and connect to their
home directory server and suddenly be,
"Hey, why can't I get to my home folder?"
And we were thinking of just sort
of getting rid of the whole Cobros
ticket for the Pro Tools user,
but it ended up being easiest to just
do this as part of our login hook.
If the user's Pro Tools,
we trash their Cobros ticket as them.
So remember, this is how you execute
a command as the user.
Remember, everything's running with the
privileges of the local root user.
If you actually want to
execute stuff as the user,
sudo u $1, because the root user may
have no privileges whatsoever
over your network file shares.
So we use kdestroy,
trash their Cobros ticket,
and then we rewrite
their Cobros preferences.
So the Cobros dialog that pops up,
rather than saying
Pro Tools where the username is,
says your student number here.
So the students log in,
they get a Cobros ticket,
it trashes the Cobros ticket,
rewrites their preferences,
and then we have their home directory
SharePoint and their classwork resources
set to automount on the desktop.
And as soon as that happens,
pops up the Cobros dialog,
they put in their student
number and their password,
so they're logged into the local
machine as the Pro Tools user,
but they kind of get all
the advantages of Cobros.
Everything from that point on,
they are their student identity,
which has worked pretty well for us.
I'm not even actually sure if we'll go
back to network homes for Pro Tools,
seeing as every major point
release seems to break it.
This makes a really big difference.
If you're not doing
this with network homes,
you should try it out.
If you can't go to
mobile home directories,
this gives you a really
big boost in performance.
Move your whole caches folder from
the network onto the local machine.
It makes such a difference.
All these tiny little read
and writes that are going on,
Well, all we're doing is, again,
we're reading the--
we're using DSCL here.
We're reading their home directory path.
We're making a local directory in
library caches username for their caches,
getting rid of the one on the network,
and making a symbolic link between them.
And then finally,
the last thing that we really
do is put in all the preferences
for all those crappy apps.
We keep a folder, Library Login Data,
on all our machines.
We have preferences in there,
application support in there.
And every time anyone logs in,
it copies all the stuff from
there into their home folder.
These tend to be pretty specific
apps that people aren't often
running on their own machines.
Or if they are, we're managing that as
part of our imaging system.
Because this just copies over them,
you might want to actually think
about backing up this stuff.
And this is where a logout
hook would come into play.
You'd log in,
back up any preferences that
exist inside the Login Data folder
that are in their home folder,
move them somewhere,
copy the login data ones in,
and then on logout,
restore their preferences.
We tend to not do that,
because we kind of like managing
the preferences for all these apps.
Well, maybe like is the wrong word.
So why do I use Bash?
I don't love Bash.
So it's installed on all Macs.
It's the default shell.
It's good enough for these kind of tasks.
Login hooks,
like if you've looked at this code,
this isn't complicated stuff.
This is the sort of stuff
you'd launch the terminal,
you'd type a couple of commands.
All you're doing is just whacking
those together in a shell script,
putting the shebang at the top so that
you know what kind of script it is,
and making it executable.
This really isn't rocket science.
So Joel said we weren't going
to teach you how to script,
but that's it.
Hash, $, bin, bash, put some commands in,
make it executable.
You said we couldn't do it.
I wouldn't use it for everything.
The language you choose
is pretty unimportant,
but I wouldn't sit there executing
SQL queries with MySQL from the
command line and parsing it with sed
and grep and filtering it all out.
If I was having to do SQL stuff,
raw LDAP stuff, anything like that,
I'd move to PHP, Perl, or Python.
Pick something with a rich
API in the stuff that you do.
I use PHP a lot for that sort of
command line scripting these days.
We have a Perl proponent coming up soon.
But whatever you use,
whatever you're comfortable with,
use it for login hooks.
So as I said,
you only need a really basic knowledge.
We're talking about the
simplest commands-- copy,
move, link, sudo, defaults.
These are not complicated things.
You'll have a couple of
Apple-specific things you want to use.
You're just gluing them all together,
and you're making a script.
If you're performing repetitive
tasks to set up your environment,
just use your login hooks.
They really make things a lot simpler.
I really think of them as
they fill in the gaps that
the MCX model doesn't cover.
So they're always there
in the background.
As far as final tips,
remember your login hooks
run as the local root user.
If you start trying to do stuff
on your network home directories,
that user has no privileges there.
Use sudo u $1 to perform stuff
as the user who's logging in.
Use logger a lot.
Even use logger to redirect
all output from your scripts
when you're developing them.
Just dump it all somewhere.
It'll make your life a lot easier.
Learn how to use just DSCL these days to
retrieve information from your directory.
Remember you can always use the
search domain with DSCL if you
don't know where a user exists.
It's really not that hard to use DSCL.
Protect your scripts.
This stuff runs as root.
If you leave these scripts open
with privileges for anyone to edit,
they can just add stuff to it
every time someone logs in that
executes with root privileges.
Give read-write execute
privileges to root.
Don't let anyone else touch it.
GUI Dialogues,
I really suggest you guys look at iHook
and Growl if that's what you want to do.
Growl's really,
really good for just notifications.
They're nice and pretty.
If you keep changing the styles,
your students actually
might keep reading them.
We find we have to rotate styles,
maybe every day, once a week.
You need to move them around the screen,
move them when they click on them.
iHook is really cool.
If you want a little
bit more interactivity,
iHook is really, really simple.
Have a look at how simple it is.
You just send echo text to it.
It lets you create buttons, timers,
progress bars.
Our labs are moving to 24 hours
in the next couple of months,
so we're going to be using
iHook so that we can tell users,
hey, get out of the lab now.
It's imaging.
But that's kind of it.
Use whatever language you're
most comfortable with.
Logging hooks are really easy to do.
And now I'm going to
introduce Tim from Socap.
All right, I'm Tim Perfit.
I'm an SE in Southern California,
and I've made the career-limiting
decision of talking about how
to make getting Windows really
easy onto your Macintosh.
So I'm kind of,
I have this sickness whenever
I see a new technology,
I think not only how do I use it,
but how do I script it,
and then how do I deploy it?
So when I saw Boot Camp, I thought, wow,
I can play Microsoft Flight Simulator,
and then I thought,
how does that work in the terminal?
And then I thought,
how do I put it on a lab of 30 machines?
So that's kind of what we're
going to walk through with this.
That's what I spend my nights doing,
and I have a two-and-a-half-year-old.
Okay, what this, I want to,
and we've already
covered it a little bit,
but I want to talk about
what this session will not
make you into when you leave.
You will not become Larry Perl,
the creator of Perl.
They'll be able to buy his shirt.
I have one kind of like that.
So don't expect to actually
be him when you leave here.
But what we will talk about is actually
how to go ahead and look at the
interesting pieces to integrate between.
Perl and AppleScript Studio.
So we'll talk about a
couple of technologies.
I use signal catching and PIDs
to be able to communicate between
AppleScript Studio and Perl.
Perl doesn't have, how do you say it,
a rich API to talk with Shell Scripts,
so we have to do some
contortions to do it.
We're talking about some
parsing options to be able to
go through and get the output,
as well as some wrapping
in AppleScript Studio,
so we can make a nice GUI app
at the end of all this.
Alright,
so let's first talk about why Perl.
I know that Nigel has talked about how
you should love all languages equally.
Well,
I chose Perl for some specific reasons.
I want to parse things.
It has great regular expressions.
I don't do a ton of that,
but I knew that going forward,
if I'm going to run a command,
I want to be able to pull the pieces out.
It has signal catching and
allows me to be able to,
well, we'll talk more about
signal catching later,
but it's important that
it's part of the language.
Modules,
I don't necessarily like to code a lot.
I like to just have a module
that does stuff for me.
I didn't know what modules I was
going to use from the get-go,
but I knew that Perl pretty much has
a gazillion modules and I could do
pretty much everything that I wanted to.
And it's installed on Mac OS X,
so I didn't want to have to bundle Perl
inside an AppleScript Studio bundle,
which would make my
application pretty huge.
So it's installed on
every Mac OS X deployment.
I don't really want to get into religious
wars about whether what's better.
I don't want to get into
this PHP or Ruby or whatever,
but I think the one thing we
can agree on is that every other
scripting language is worse than Perl,
so we should go ahead and... Alright,
so we actually talk about what,
before we look at the script,
let's talk about what happens
when you install BootCamp.
So when you have this nice
journaled HFS+ volume,
represented by this upstanding
young citizen that's sitting
there computing very nicely,
and you go ahead and run BootCamp,
and BootCamp partitions off your drive.
It puts an MS-DOS partition on it,
which is represented,
and then NTFS is put on there,
represented by this
kind of shady looking,
geeky sort of guy.
And then NTFS has this nice thing
where it has to write down where it's
located on the drive in its partition.
And that's not just fun to know,
but it is required to
actually boot Windows,
because otherwise it won't start up,
and you get this black screen
with a little flashing cursor.
And you have to do this whole
master boot record junk.
Because BootCamp puts
the whole BIOS emulation,
and so you've got to replicate
that in order to boot up Windows.
So that's what we've got
to kind of replicate,
and that's what we've got to kind
of understand to be able to do this.
So before we actually
go ahead and script it,
let's actually see how do we
do it from the command line.
How do we actually script it?
Or how do we actually run it?
I'm going to do this really fast,
I'm going to do it in 10 seconds.
Alright, I don't want to,
it's not important.
So the first thing that we do is
we actually take your DiskUtil,
resize the volume,
we take up the master boot record,
we clone it.
Then we restore it by unzipping it,
reversing some crazy hex numbers,
putting it to NPS, and then marking the
partition as bootable.
Not important,
I'm going to post the script,
you can see it.
But this is kind of the lines
that if you wanted to go up,
and instead of running that really
difficult BootCamp application,
you could run these easy
commands on the command line,
and it would be much easier.
In fact, Brian James probably could write
a nice Ajax wrapper around it
to be able to do these scripts.
But instead, I chose Perl.
Before we get that,
I want to get to the next part.
I want to give a warning for my mom.
So she told me when I got here that
anytime you're programming in Perl,
make sure you use the
-w in the shebang line.
I'm being a little flippant,
but it's important because Perl will
ignore things like if you're using a
variable that has not been defined yet,
or not been populated yet,
and it'll cause you some
debugging nightmares.
So anytime you use this first
line of your script that tells
where the interpreter is,
just put -w on there,
and you'll make my mom happy.
So that's important.
Alright, so let's get to the script.
Let's see what actually happens.
So the first part is
when we actually run it.
So this is the completed script.
I called it WinClone.
And that's if you do a Google search,
you'll actually find
there's a wrapper around it,
as well as the Perl scripts
contained within it.
And the first thing we want to do
in the Perl script is go through and
parse out the command line options.
So the worst way to do this, I mean,
I've seen this,
and a lot of computer science
students will do this,
is they'll try and parse out
all your different options,
and they'll do is they'll say, "Okay,
the first thing is a space.
We don't need that.
Then a dash.
Oh, it's an option." And then
it gets the letter.
It's a lot of work.
If you don't see it all,
there's a get-op library function
that allows you to do this loop.
But Perl,
one of the cool things about all
these modules is they're constantly
trying to find easier ways to do it.
So within this,
I can specify -- so for this example,
I have -v.
So that's a common one for verboseness.
And what this does is just basically
say if the user has put -v on it,
set this flag in the verbose variable.
Okay, so it's very simple to do.
I don't have to loop around it.
It's basically one line, and it's done.
We can pass it strings as well.
So this one example is
the source partition.
So with one line,
I can basically take what
the source partition is
specified on the command line,
populate this variable, and move on.
Now, the other important thing after this
is to populate your defaults afterwards
because it doesn't touch any of the
variables that it doesn't know about,
obviously.
So you want to set that.
Bootcamp's really nice because it always
does it in kind of the same place,
and things are pretty standard.
So you can see that it's kind of in
the same place as the source partition.
So that's kind of when
we start processing it.
So let's actually talk about
when we have a GUI wrapper and
how to integrate between it.
So we have an AppleScript app,
or an AppleScript Studio app.
That's the button I'm
not supposed to press?
Okay.
AppleScript Studio app.
There's another one on here
I'm not supposed to press,
so I won't do that either.
It calls a Perl script,
and this Perl script goes
ahead and it spawns off all
these command line utilities.
Disk util,
I use a bunch of open source tools, NTFS,
clone, NTFS, label, those kind of things.
And then those do funky
things to your hard drive,
like reformat or partitioning
it and copying file systems.
And that's great.
I mean, that's like,
you saw the lines of code.
There's eight lines of code.
So the Perl script is trivial.
But then what happens if the user
clicks cancel in the middle of this?
What do we do?
Well, okay, do we stop the Perl script?
That sounds like a good thing.
We just kill out the Perl script.
But what happens if it's in the
middle of repartitioning your disk?
Your disk is unmounted.
It's moving data around.
You don't really want to
kill off the Perl script.
So that's fine.
Let's leave it alone.
Well, if we leave it alone,
then it'll continue cloning your drive,
and your CPU usage will go up
to 100%, 200%, 400%. And then
you'll clone it again.
And you got two clones.
And then you'll have the
same type of operation.
You'll have the same type of operation.
And then you'll have the
same type of operation.
So we want to be able to
do some sanity with this.
So be able to have the user feedback
and do things that make sense.
But as you can see,
these arrows are shaded.
That means there's no direct
connection between them.
We're not controlling them.
AppleScript Studio has this kind
of laissez-faire attitude towards
dealing with command line scripts.
So let's actually look how we do it.
So the way I did it is
with signal catching.
So let's talk a little
bit about death and dying,
which you didn't think today you'd
call a little counseling session.
So we have this Perl script,
and the user clicks cancel.
We wanted to have some way
for the AppleScript Studio to
communicate and say,
OK, I want you to go away.
I want you to die.
I want the parent to kill off the child,
the grandparents to kill off the parents.
Let's have a little nasty
death and dying type thing.
So the simple way to do it is just
have the AppleScript Studio app
send it a signal.
Signals are all the rage in Unix.
You send it a termination signal.
You hit Control-C.
You do an interrupt,
those kind of things.
But in Perl,
normally what it does is it just dies.
But we want to catch that.
And so these first two lines, basically,
we have sigterm.
It'll catch the termination signal,
which is--
and I'm sorry,
the two of the termination signals as
well as the interrupt signal and it'll
set that to call the catch function.
So anytime, no matter what you're doing,
when the signal gets caught,
it'll go ahead and run the subroutine.
So term is usually sent
when you do a kill command,
but then if somebody runs
this from a command line,
they'll do a control C,
that's the interrupt signal.
I don't deal with HUP,
so there is a way to
get around my script,
but if you're doing that,
then you already know about it
and you can do something else.
The next one is a really important
piece and this I thought was really
interesting because if you don't
want to have to keep track of
what current scripts are running,
right?
The Perl scripts is
running other scripts,
but a good way to do it is to put
them in their own process group.
So Perl has this great
command set process group,
set P group.
I don't know the cool
UNIX way to say that,
set per group, set P group, I don't know.
But anyways,
Joel probably has one that says that
he was sitting there correcting me
on all the different UNIX commands,
but... What this does, and this is,
I love saying this because it
sounds so cool at dinner parties.
When Perl spawns off
another UNIX process,
it will set the process group of
that process to the process group,
the process ID of the Perl script.
Okay, I didn't even understand that.
Okay, so anything it spawns off,
so it spawns off,
let's say it spawns off DiskUtil,
it'll set the process group
to the process ID of the Perl
script that's its parent.
And so that's kind of cool.
Anything I spawn off,
I can now easily keep track of,
and I can kill off.
So in my catch,
there's two different ways.
If I'm doing a critical operation,
I do $CS, a critical section,
I don't do anything.
I basically say, "Oh, okay,
let's just set a global variable
and move along." And whenever
this critical operation is done,
it can go ahead and clean up
and figure out what to do.
If we're not in a critical section,
it can go ahead and just kill off it.
And I could keep track of all
these little UNIX utilities,
but the better way to do is now
that since the process group is set,
I can just send... I can send the
kill signal to the negative of
the process ID of the Perl script.
Process ID of the Perl script is $$.
If you put a negative
sign in front of it,
it makes it to the process group.
And that's what's great about Perl.
It's simple.
I mean, you can just read it.
It's a very legible language.
Alright,
so let's talk a little bit about,
so now we actually want to be able to
communicate back to the AppleScript.
So the AppleScript communicates
to us by sending us kill signals.
We want to talk back to our parents.
And the way we do that
is I use PID files.
So if you ever go into
var run on your system,
you'll sign all these little PID files.
And all they are is it's saying that this
daemon's running with this process ID.
And a lot of Unix daemons
use it to communicate.
So we communicate with it.
And you can see here it has the
echo dollar sign dollar sign.
Again,
that's the process ID of the parent.
And it shoves us into the process ID.
And I put it in var run because
that's where it's supposed to be.
And I called it winclone.pid.
The cool thing about this now is
that the AppleScript Studio app can
just look in that directory and say,
is it running?
And if it is running,
it can find out what the process ID is.
So it doesn't have to go through
and like look at the process table
and figure out what process ID I am.
It communicates that back
just to this one file.
And so once we actually want
to clean all this mess up,
we basically do some operations,
then we remove that PID file.
And as soon as that
PID file gets removed,
the AppleScript Studio goes, oh,
it must be done.
So then it does it.
The nice thing about var
run is that when you reboot,
it clears it out.
So you don't have to worry
about stale PID files.
And so that's probably why if
you've ever used an app before that
wasn't wrote as awesomely as my app,
and it leaves this PID file
when it's not supposed to,
like somebody force quits it,
and it doesn't work, and you reboot,
then it all works great.
Well, that's one of the reasons
it clears the PID files out.
So now let's talk about wrapping
in PerlScript and AppleScript.
AppleScript.
Ah, ah, ah.
Yahoo, Yahoo.
All right.
So GarageBand is a great program,
but it's not for everybody,
as you can see.
[Transcript missing]
And finally,
if we want to actually run this,
we use the do shell script
with administrator privileges.
And this is really cool
because if you do this,
it will prompt the user for
their username and password,
and then it'll cache it for whatever
is set in your Etsy authorization,
which is usually, I believe,
five minutes.
So that means if you're
running a series of,
like I am, six or seven commands,
the user puts their username
and password in once,
and then it'll go ahead and just be
able to run these scripts as root,
basically, or administrator privileges.
All right, so let's look at how do we get
out from Apple Script Studio.
So now we have this Perl script running,
and I talked about on the other end
when the Perl script gets killed,
it goes to this catch routine.
What do we do in Apple Script Studio when
the user clicks cancel?
Well,
we just send it the unix command kill,
and we send it the dash term signal.
Not necessarily needed,
but it's kind of explicit,
so it's nice to see.
And we have to know the
process ID of the Perl script.
Well, you could do all this set and
grep and awk of the process table,
or you could remember that in
var run we had that pid file,
and all we need to do is find out
what the process ID is in there.
Of course, you want to wrap this code
with does the pid file exist.
So the pid file exists, you just grab it,
the back text basically takes the result,
puts it in this command,
so we have kill dash term some number.
And we run it with administrative
privileges because our Perl
scripts can be running as root.
So this will do that,
and then the Perl script won't
necessarily die right away,
because it might be in the middle of
a critical operation that might take
30 seconds to 5 minutes to clean up.
So what we want to do is set a state,
set some global variable so
we know that it's quitting.
Then we have to do something with the UI,
because how many people have had
an app where they have cancel,
and they click cancel,
and nothing happens?
They click cancel, cancel, cancel,
cancel.
What's that, mail app?
Okay, thanks.
No comment, no comment.
It's all fixed in Leopard.
Everything's fixed in Leopard.
and then so you want to set the title
of the button to change it to give the
state and then make it disabled so you
sit there you don't click on it get your
credit card charged 15 times because
you press the button more than once.
So give the user feedback but then
you're left with this state that's
kind of stopping kind of starting
and what we want to do is be able
to go back and figure out when do we
clean up and the way we do that is an
idle handler in AppleScript Studio.
So there's a great handler in
AppleScript Studio called idle that
gets called whenever it's idle,
whenever it's not doing anything.
And you return at the end of it
how much how many seconds before
you want it to be called again
or that's not technically true.
Don't call me before this
many seconds have passed.
So you can't guarantee it'll
be the amount of time but you
know I'll do it occasionally.
So it's great for
cleanup tasks like this.
So what we do is we ask the system
events does this file exist?
This is our PID file.
If the file exists we know that
our Perl script is still running.
If the Perl script or if the
PID file disappears we know that we
can go ahead and do some cleanup.
So this idle handle will do it for us.
And so we don't really have to
have any tight coupling of these
the GUI with the command line.
It just needs to look and
see if a file exists on disk.